it's a pleasure to be here in n breh
Scotland the birthplace of the needle
and syringe less than a mile from here
in this direction in 1853 a Scotsman
Farley's very first patent on the needle
and syringe his name was Alexander wood
and was at the Royal College of
Physicians this is the patent what blows
my mind when I look at it even today is
that it looks almost identical it's a
needle in use today yet it's a hundred
and sixty years old so we turned to the
field of vaccines most vaccines are
delivered with the needle and syringe
this 160 year old technology and credit
where it's due on many levels vaccines
are a successful technology after clean
water and sanitation vaccines are the
one technology that has increased our
lifespan the most that's a pretty hard
act to beat but just like any other
technology vaccines have their
shortcomings and the needle the needle
and syringe is a key part within that
narrative this old technology so let's
start with the obvious many of us don't
like the needle and syringe I share that
view however the twenty percent of the
population have a thing called needle
phobia
that's more than disliking the needle
that is actively avoiding being
vaccinated because of needle phobia and
that's problematic in terms the rollout
of vaccines now related to this is
another key issue which is needlestick
injuries and the w-h-o has figures that
suggest about 1.3 million deaths per
year take place due to cross
contamination with needle stick injuries
these are early deaths that take place
now these are two things that you
probably may have heard of but there's
two other shortcomings of the needle and
syringe you may not have heard about one
is it could be holding back the next
generation
vaccines in terms of their immune
responses and the second is it could be
responsible for the problem of the cold
chain that I'll tell you about as well
I'm going to tell you about some work
that my team and I are doing in
Australia at the University of
Queensland on a technology designed to
tackle those four problems and that
technology is called the nanopatch now
this is a specimen of the nanopatch to
the naked eye it just looks like a
square
it's smaller than a postage stamp but
under a microscope what you see is
thousands of tiny projections that are
invisible to the human eye and there's
about 4,000 projections on this
particular square compared to the needle
and I've designed those projections to
serve a key role which is to work with
the skin's immune system and so that's a
very important function tied in with the
nanopatch now we make the nanopatch with
a technique called deep reactive ion
etching and this particular technique is
one that's been borrowed from the
semiconductor industry and therefore as
low costing can be rolled out in large
numbers
now we're dry coke vaccines - the
projections of the nanopatch and apply
it to the skin now the simplest form of
application is using our finger but our
finger has some limitations so we've
devised an applicator and it's a very
simple device you could call it as a
sophisticated finger as a spring
operated device what we do is when we
apply the nanopatch to the skin as so
immediately a few things happen so
firstly the projections on the nanopatch
breach through the tough outer layer and
the vaccine is very quickly released
within less than two minutes in fact
then we can take the nanopatch off and
discard it and indeed we can make a
reuse of the applicator itself so that
gives you an idea of the Nano pattern
immediately you can see some
Lanta jizz we've talked about it being
needle free these are projections that
you can't even see and of course we get
around the needle phobia issue as well
now if we take a step back and think
about these other two really important
advantages one is improved immune
responses through delivery and the
second is getting rid of the cold chain
so let's start with the first one
there's some you know genus of the idea
it takes a little while to get our head
around but I tried to explain it in
simple simple terms so I'll take a step
back and explain to you how vaccines
work in a simple way so vaccines work by
introducing to our body I think called
an antigen which is a safe form of a
germ okay now that safe germ that
antigen tricks our body into mounting an
immune response learning and remembering
how to deal with intruders when the real
intruder comes along the body quickly
mounts an immune response to deal with
that vaccine and neutralizes the
infection so does that well now the way
it's done today with the needles
syringes most vaccines a delivered that
way with this old technology in the
needle but it could be argued that the
needle is holding back our immune
responses it's missing our immune sweet
spot in the skin to describe this idea
we need to take a journey through the
skin starting with one of those
projections okay and applying the
nanopatch to the skin and we see this
kind of data now this is real data that
thing that we can see there is one
projection from the nanopatch that's
been applied to the skin and those
colors are different layers now to give
you an idea of scale if the needle was
shown here it would be too big I'd be
ten times bigger than the size of that
screen going ten times deeper as well
it's off the grid entirely you can see
immediately that we have those
projections in the skin that red layer
is a tough outer layer of dead skin but
the brown layer and the magenta layer
are jammed full of immune cells as one
example in the brown layer the certain
type of cell called Langerhans so every
square millimeter of our body is jammed
full of those Wang Han cells those
immune cells and there's others shown as
well that we haven't
and in this image but you can
immediately see that the nanopatch
achieves that penetration indeed we
target thousands upon thousands of these
particular cells just residing within a
hair's width of the surface of the skin
now as the the guy that's in vents of
this thing and designed it to do that I
found that exciting but so what
I saw what if your targeted cells in the
world of vaccines what does that mean
now the world of vaccines is getting
better it's getting more systemic
however you still don't really know if a
vaccines going to work until you roll
your sleeves up and vaccinate and wait
it's a gamblers game even today so we
had to do that gamble we obtained an
influenza vaccine we applied it to our
nano patches and we apply the nano
patches to the skin and we waited and
this is in the live animal and we waited
a month and this is what we found out
this is a data slide showing the immune
responses that we've generated with the
nanopatch compared to the needle and
syringe into muscle so on the horizontal
axis we have the dose shown in nano
grams on the vertical axis we have the
immune response generated and that
dashed line that dash line indicates
that protection threshold if we're above
that line it's considered protective if
we're below that line it's not so the
red line is mostly below that curve and
indeed there's only one points that's
achieved with the needle that's
protective and that's with a high dose
of 6,000 nano grams but notice
immediately the distinctly different
curve that we achieve with the blue line
that's what's achieved with the
nanopatch the delivered dose of the
nanopatch is a completely different
immunogenicity curve that's a real fresh
opportunity suddenly we have a brand new
lever in the world of vaccines we can
push it one way where we could take a
vaccine that works but it's too
expensive and get protection with a
hundredth of the dose compared to the
needle they could take a vaccine it
suddenly 10 dollars down to 10 cents and
that's particularly important with in
the developing world but there's another
angle to this as well you could take
vaccines that currently don't work and
get them over that line and get them
protect
and certainly in the world of vaccines
that can be important let's consider the
big three HIV malaria tuberculosis
they're responsible for about 7 million
deaths per year and there's no adequate
vaccination method for any of those so
potentially with this new lever that we
have with the nanopatch we can help make
that happen we can push that lever to
help get those candidate vaccines over
the line now of course we've worked with
in my lab with many other vaccines that
have obtained it similar sponsors and
similar curves to this what we've
achieved with influenza I'd like to now
switch to talk about another key
shortcoming of today's vaccines and that
is the need to maintain the cold chain
as the name suggests the cold chain it's
the requirements of keeping a vaccine
right from production all the way
through to when the vaccine is applied
to keep it refrigerated now that
presents some logistical challenges but
we have ways to do it now this is a
slightly extreme case in point but it
helps illustrate the logistical
challenges of particularly in
resource-poor settings of what's
required to get vaccines refrigerated
and maintained in the cold chain if the
vaccine is to to warm the vaccine breaks
down but interestingly it can be too
cold and the vaccine can break down as
well now the stakes are very high
the w-h-o estimates that within africa
up to half the vaccines use there are
considered to not be working properly
because at some point the cold chain has
fallen over so it's a big problem and
it's tied in with a needle and syringe
because it's a liquid form vaccine and
when it's liquid it needs a
refrigeration a key attribute of our
nanopatch is that the vaccine is dry and
when it's dry it doesn't need
refrigeration and within my lab we've
shown that we can keep the vaccine
stored at 23 degrees Celsius for more
than a year without any loss in activity
at all that's an important improvement
we're delighted about it as well and the
thing about it is that we have well and
truly proven the nanopatch within the
laboratory setting and as a scientist I
love that and I love science however as
an engineer as a biomedical engineer and
also as a human being I'm not going to
be satisfied until we've rolled this
thing out taking it out of the lab and
got it to people in large numbers and
particularly the people that need it the
most
so we've commenced this particular
journey and we've commenced this journey
in an unusual way we've started with
Papa New Guinea
now Papua New Guinea is an example of a
developing world country and it's about
the same size as France but it suffers
from many of the key barriers existing
with within the world of today's
vaccines there's logistics within this
country there's only 800 refrigerators
to keep vaccines chilled many of them
rolled like this one in Port Moresby
many of them are breaking down and many
are not in the highlands where where
they're required that's a challenge but
also Papua New Guinea has the world's
highest incidence of HPV human
papillomavirus the cervical cancer
vaccine yet that vaccine is not
available in large numbers because it's
too expensive so for those two reasons
with the attributes of the nanopatch
we've got into the field and work with
the nanopatch and taken it to Papua New
Guinea and we'll be following that up
shortly now doing this kind of work is
not easy it's challenging but there's
nothing else in the world I'd rather be
doing and as we look ahead I'd like to
share with you a thought it's the
thought of a future where the 17 million
deaths per year that we currently have
due to infectious disease is a
historical footnote and it's a
historical footnote that's been achieved
by improved radically improved vaccines
now standing here today in front of you
at the birthplace of the needle and
syringe devices 160 years old I'm
presenting to an alternative approach
that could really help make that happen
and it's a nano patch with its
attributes of being needle free
pain-free the ability for removing the
coal chain and improving the
immunogenicity thank you
you